---
layout: post
title: "Causation, Solutions and Quine"
---

Title's a bit cryptic huh? Well, better than title of books named after its protagonist like Mrs. Dalloway. 

Due to big data (basically just linear regression), people become interested in so called "correlation" rather than "causation". Any student of reasoning, science and statistics will tell you not to confuse the two. But really, what is the difference between them, and why do I think causation is an illusion stemming directly from the illusion of the flow of time. Starting from the concrete and factual physical laws of nature, I will attempt tread into speculative mathematical and philosophical interpretations, and at the end, we will talk about some flashy (but less useful) discussions like time travelling and free will at the end.

There are two ways to understand the physical world, the first the usual and most intuitive way to understand physics -- x causes y according to some laws of physics. Me pushing on this cart caused it to move, water caused light to refract and a changing magnetic field caused some current to move through some wire. But there is another, more complete, but less intuitive way as well -- physical states that can exist are and only are solutions to various physical equations. Me pushing on a cart and it moving is a solution to Newton's Laws of motion, light following a certain path that appears to be bend by water is a solution to the principle of least time, and a changing magnetic field and current existing together is a solution to Laws of electromagnetism. In fact, in practice, looking at the solutions of an equation without thinking about the causation often makes a physics problem easy to solve. For example, if you're trying to find how much more money you need to make such that your wealth in the past is 80% of what you currently have. If you think in terms of causation, an easy step to make is to simply add 20%, but now since you have more wealth 20% will be bigger than your previous addition, so you have to add more of the difference. The result is an infinite sequence that is kind of difficult to solve. However, if you look past the causation, you will use an equation describing the relationship and find a solution[^money-solution]. In fact, causation is so baked into the English language -- almost every verb denotes an causation (after all, actions cause other thing) -- that mathematicians and physicists often use say "x is such that bla bla bla" to sidestep this limitations. If you don't believe me I challenge you to reword the previous problem as "make your wealth \[verb\] \[object\]". 

[^money-solution]: $0.8x = y$, where $x$ is your new wealth and $y$ is your old wealth. 

Ah, but you ask, surely me standing on top of Eiffel Tower does not violate any laws of physics, but to get there, I have to climb up first, so isn't it clear that my climb caused me to be on top of the Eiffel Tower? Yes, you're totally right, but this can also be viewed as a solution to time-dependent equations, meaning that instead of the past determining the future and the future reflecting the past, the entire history (and future) is a solution to the time-depended laws of physics. 

Since there is no direction in any equation in laws of physics -- an equal sign is a two way street: when there is a force, there is an acceleration, and when there is an acceleration, there is a force. In fact, time itself doesn't even have a direction in any law of physics. We think that obviously a force causes an acceleration, and not the other way around. We can only work "backward" to find out what the force if we only know the acceleration. Where does our intuition of causation come from? Does it mean a force happen before the acceleration? Not really, they happen at the same time (excluding the wave propagation limited by the speed of light / sound). Does it mean then the cause is something we can control? Not really either, we say that cancer might cause death, but we can't control whether we get cancer. So what is causation, and how is it related to force?

I would argue that causation is just an illusion stemming from the illusion of time. When the time-dependent solution evolves from one time to the next, we experience a so called "force", literally or figuratively. When we fall off from a balcony and break a bone, we experience a tremendous force breaking the bone. However, a more accurate and useful lens to examine this scenario is seeing that falling from a high place and the bone breaking is a solution that is a solution to the conservation of energy and many other laws, whereas falling from a great high and not sustaining any injury is not. We experience forces push and pull things as we experience time flows from one to the next in a solution to some set of equations. We experience we cannot break the conservation of energy because there are forces stopping us when in fact forces are just an invented solution This is the so called chain of causation and force is the link. But I would say if there is no illusion of time, we would just see (whatever seeing means without time for thought to evolve), we would just look at the history and the future just like looking at a painting. We wouldn't need to explain anything in terms of causation, but speak of the view as a whole. 

## The symmetry of space time and the directionality of 